---
layout: post
title:  "On Advice"
date:   2018-10-05 18:00:00 +0200
categories: jekyll update
---

I have received and noticed other people receive advice. Most of the time, said advice advocated actions falling into either of those categories:
1. Easy to realize, specific/complex in nature
2. Hard to realize, general/simple in nature

Pleas note that I only consider advice that comes with at least a hint of potential in it. 'Advised' actions from all categories can be completely useless.

For the sake of concreteness let's instantiate both categories with examples.

# Case study: Dishant

Desperate Dishant: I'm not happy. At age 28, I have been calling Lyon my home for all of my life. Having spent some years on a career path that is very different from the ones my high school and college friends chose, I consider myself alienated from them. My relation to my family has never been up there anyway. At work, I've had conflicts with colleagues that seem as if they remained for good. I'm fed up with his.

Advising [Eleanor](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HuS5NuXRb5Y): Dishant! You need a fresh start! A clean slate! Clearly, you need to leave this putrid environment behind you and not let you be affected by this negativity any further. Move to Amsterdam, Leipzig or even Austin in case you're a lucky bastard being able to secure a visa! Tabula rasa, my friend.

I'd argue that this is _easy_ as Dishant might feel like there is nothing to lose in Lyon anyway. Why not just flee and leave scorched earth behind. It is also something fairly _specific_, somewhat tailored to his particular situation, not a general guideline for, say conflict resolution, in life.

# Case study: Pauline

Problematic Pauline: I'm healthy, mostly enjoying work, know I will always be able to pay the bills and have a nice and relatively caring social environment. Still, I feel like things aren't quite cutting it. Especially upon reading about _successful_, in some regard, people I feel like I should strive for some substantial enhancements, greater goals in life.

Wise Wilfred: Pauline, I suggest you meditate on your possessions and achievements in life, count your blessings. Additionally I recommend you ask yourself whether it is likely that some aspects could add substantial value to your life and if so, how likely it is that you could achieve such values.

This is hard to realize. It takes effort to consciously count one's own blessings. Even more so, it is not only a delicate but also an annoying task to try to think of things one hasn't explored or experienced so far. Some people argue this isn't even possible, others claim it's at least approximately possible. Pauline would have to ask herself very fundamental questions and try to evaluate the limitations of his perception. Naturally, this fundamental questioning is general, as it would apply to countless scenarios revolving around the inclusion of content in one's life.

# Why I think most people advise the way they do and what I (don't) make of it

|         | Simple/general              | Complex/specific  |
| Easy    | (1) Inexistent?<sup>1</sup> | (2) Most advice |
| Hard    | (3) Some advice             | (4) Where you want to get|

My intuition confirms exactly what my brain desires to hear: it makes sense. Most advisers suffer constraints making it extremely hard to penetrate (4). On the one hand, the adviser would need to thoroughly understand the specific context of the advised, requiring lots of effort. On the other hand, people tend to prefer delivering good news, avoiding confrontation and hard truths, requiring quite some effort. The adviser is generally not incentivized to incur the loss of lots of effort + quite some effort. Bottom line is they are drawn towards (1), can't reach it, so either go for (2) or (3).

I personally came to appreciate advice from (2) far more than from (3). I have taken advice from (3) seriously and it might have led to some positive properties. I could think of [Dale Carnegie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Win_Friends_and_Influence_People)'s advice to try to greet people like a dog right now. Yet they have never made a substantial difference as of now. Most values has been derived by taking advice from (3) and trying to tailor it to my particular context myself, with the knowledge I already have of it. An example of that would be applying [Stephen Covey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_7_Habits_of_Highly_Effective_People)'s distinction and treatment<sup>2</sup> of circle of interest and circle of influence to the particularities of my life.

TL;DR: Mostly disregard (2), take promising advice from (3) and bring it to (4).

<sup>1</sup> If not, please tell me immediately

<sup>2</sup> He points out that in general the a person's circle of influence is a subset of the circle of interest and much smaller in size. He goes on to argue that by artificially reducing the circle of interest, one can increase the circle of influence.
