---
layout: post
title:  "Log, right?"
date:   2020-01-16 19:38:07 +0200
categories: jekyll update
comments: false
---

Most Machine Learning projects have seen me write a function to log data to a log-file as well as apply a logarithm to a vector. As I'm not aware of a conventionally used synonym for the former use of 'log' and the latter is usually referred to as 'log' in mathematics (thereby rejecting the argument I would usually bring up in naming issues: avoid abbreviations and acronyms) a naming problem naturally arises. What's `log`?

So let's take a step back and formalize our desires from naming.

## Goals
- Given a function name `fn` and knowledge of what `fn` does, it should make sense.
- Given a function name `fn`, no knowledge of what `fn` does but a hunch that the name `fn` indicates it does what one wants it to do, it should work out.
- The function should be named after the first possible name the user would give its operation/task and thereby be very easy and intuitive to find. [0]

The first goal should be self-evident and be realized by any thinkable suggestion. While achieving the latter goal might be the pinnacle of interface design, I'm afraid it is unreachable in this context. Many people will just want to give the operation they have in mind the name `log` - a naming conflict. Hence we will evaluate options by whether they manage to realize the second goal.


## Options

For the sake of concreteness, let's define both semantics:

```python
import numpy as np

def fn1(data):
	filename = 'log.csv'
    	with open(filename, mode='a+') as log_file:
        	log_writer = csv.writer(log_file, delimiter='|', quotechar='',
                                	quoting=csv.QUOTE_NONE, escapechar='\\')
        	log_writer.writerow(data)

def fn2(x):
	return np.log(x)
```


### Option 1: log, logarithmize/convert_to_log, 
- Cumbersome
- Doesn't solve goal 2
- Possible hit, possibly confusion wrt goal 3

### Option 2: write_to_log, log
Trade-off equal (resp. symmetric) to option 1.

### Option 2: write_to_log, convert_to_log
- Double cumbersome
- Solves goal 2
- No hit and no confusion wrt goal 3

After many late-night executive decisions to go with either option 1 or 2 for no reason but tiredness I will from now on side with option 3. 

## Addendum 1: Type signatures might help by hinting at the problem, but don't solve the problem.Q
Type hints, both with respect to funciton parameters as well as return values, in combination with some signature IDE or editor functions might provide a lot of ease and value to the user. More precisely, they can protect against overconfidence purely derived from the name of a function. E.g. a user looking for a mathematical log, finding out about the existence of a function called `log` might blindly trust that it applies the mathematical log. With the following definition:

```python
import numpy as np
from nptyping import Array

def log(x: Array[float]) -> None:
	filename = 'log.csv'
    	with open(filename, mode='a+') as log_file:
        	log_writer = csv.writer(log_file, delimiter='|', quotechar='',
                                	quoting=csv.QUOTE_NONE, escapechar='\\')
        	log_writer.writerow(data)

```
the existence of a problem would _usually_ become apparent. Note that only usually, as a user would, as I see it, _usually_ expect a copy of the array to be returned. In case the user assumes an in-place/by reference update, it doesn't help at all. Moreover, it is not constructive in avoiding the problem.

## Addendum 2: Offloading responsibility from naming to commenting.
While this could under some circumstances be a useful addition, I have two problems with this.
1. I try to respect the general approach of using comments to describe _how_ I'm doing things. I intend to clarify the _what_ by naming.
2. This alone only fulfills goal 2 under the assumption that users _always_ read function signatures before usage.

## Addendum 3: Why bother?
Naturally, I'd ask myself the question: Why bother with all of this naming?
It is not perfectly clear that it is _worth_ the effort. What is clear is that there is upside to it.
1. In general, knowing that a cost will have to be paid, it is a good idea to pay it upfront to a time of my choice than having to do it on-demand. Expense increases with the lack of flexibility.
2. It seems to me that such structural, engineering practices vehemently rely on consistency. Both users and I only truly start profiting from such upsides if we all have the feeling that they hold at least 'almost all of the time'[1].
3. Moreover, I like to think of this thought process as practice. I will face very similar decisions time and time again and thinking about them earlier will make it easier to make good calls later.


[0] Note that there is another possible distinction to be made here: It can easily be argued that not having a 'hit' is way superior to having a 'hit' with semantics differing from expectation.
[1] Think of a sigmoid function. Perceived value = sigmoid(likelihood of success of intuition) with a vertical inflection point[2] somewhere between 0.9 and 1.
[2] I think inflection points are 'horizontal' by definition, please forgive the abuse of terminology. :)
