---
title: "Mantras"
date: 2022-09-04 7:38:07 +0200
comments: false
published: true
description: I like to recite like prayers
tags: [thoughts]
katex: False

---

# A system just can't respond to short-term changes when it has long-term delays.
- Donella H. Meadows, Thinking in Systems

---

# Always be closing.

---

# Am meisten erreicht man, wann man den Lustgewinn aus den Quellen psyschicher und intellektueller Arbeit genügend zu erhöhen versteht.
- Sigmund Freud, Das Unbehagen in der Kultur

---

# Be a parent to yourself.
- A wise Hacker News user

---

# Defend those who are absent.
- Steven Covey, 7 Habbits of Highly Effective People

---

# Don't confuse effort with result.
- Donella H. Meadows, Thinking in Systems

---

# Don't judge decisions by their outcome.
- Distillation of ideas in Nassim Taleb's Fooled by Randomness

---

# Don't use parantheses. Either give the subject its rightful stage or remove it for it lacks importance.

---

# Euphemisms are the mother tongue of manipulation.  [...] if someone doesn't use straight language, don't act straight away
- Mikael Krogerugs & Roman Tschäppeler, The Communication Book

---

# Explicit is better than implicit.
- [The Zen of Python](https://peps.python.org/pep-0020/)

---

# Greet people like a labrador.
- Heavily inspired by analogies used in Dale Carnegie's How to Win Friends & Influence People

---

# Hustle while you wait
- Inspired by description of Malcolm X in Alex Haley's Malcom X

---

# I stop writing every day at the point where I feel I can write more. Do that and the next day's work goes surprisingly smoothly.
- Haruki Murakami

---

# If communication does not work, you should ask yourself: what state am I in at the moment
- Mikael Krogerugs & Roman Tschäppeler, The Communication Book

---

# If you want to be a good intuitive Bayesian [...] you need to protect your priors. [...] that might mean turning off the news.
- Brian Christian & Tom Griffiths, Algorithms to Live By

---

# If you're evenly split on a difficult decision, take the path that is more difficult in the short term.
- Naval Ravikant as quoted in Eric Jorgenson's The Almanack of Naval

---


# If you’re thinking without writing, you only think you’re thinking.

— Leslie Lamport

---

# Impatience with actions, patience with results.
- Naval Ravikant as quoted in Eric Jorgenson's The Almanack of Naval

---

# Irony has only emergency use. Carried over time, it is the voice of the trapped who have come to enjoy the cage. [...] serves an almost exclusively negative function.
- David Foster Wallace as quoted in D.T. Max's Every Love Story Is a Ghost Story

---

# Measure twice, cut once.
- Steven Covey, 7 Habbits of Highly Effective People

---

# Most important things are a marathon, not a sprint.

---

# Most things don't work; and that's okay.

---

# Needs and wants are different in degree, not in kind.
- Jacob Lund Fisker, Early Retirement Extreme

---

# Never do anything that's not important.

---

# Nie mehr will ich meine Augen niederschlagen, wenn eine schöne Frau mir begegnet.
- Hermann Hesse, Siddhartha

---

# People tend to over-explore
- Brian Christian & Tom Griffiths, Algorithms to Live By

---

# Probably every vice was once a virtue.
- Will & Ariel Durant, The Lessons of History


---

# Signs misguide us in any single case, but they guide is right in the majority of them.
- Polya, How to Solve It

---

# Sleep when tired.
- Distillation of Nick Cammarata [tweet](https://twitter.com/nickcammarata/status/1328335453309657088?s=20&t=_-zlXTCAvfvC467uvog7lw)

---

# Sometimes scantiness of nourishment restores the system.
- Nassim Taleb, Antifragile

---

# The old is expected to stay longer than the young in proportion to their age.
- Nassim Taleb, Antifragile, in reference to Power-law distributed phenomena

---
# The truth can set you free.
- Randy Pausch, The Last Lecture

---

# To what use am I now putting the power of my soul?
- Marc Aurel, Meditations,

---

# What you do on your bad days matters more than what you do on your good days.
- Kevin Kelly, [103 bits of advice I wish I had known](https://kk.org/thetechnium/103-bits-of-advice-i-wish-i-had-known/)

---

# When everyone is sick, we no longer consider it a disease.
- Naval Ravikant as quoted in Eric Jorgenson's The Almanack of Naval

---

# When in doubt: go to bed; don't eat; don't buy.

---

# [...] when you take risks, insults by half-men [...] are similar to barks by non-human animals: you can't feel insulted by a dog.
- Nassim Taleb, Antifragile

---

# Will anyone sneer at me? That will be his concern; mine will be to ensure that nothing I do or say deserve the sneer.
- Marc Aurel, Meditations

---

# You can't expect above-average outcomes from an average approach.
- Distillation of Paul Graham's [Beating the Averages](http://www.paulgraham.com/avg.html)

---

# You don't know whose dog died today.

---

# You must study the endgame before anything else.
- Peter Thiel and Blake Masters quoting Raùl Capablanca in Zero to One

---

# Your obligation is that of active participation.
- Edsger Dijsktra

