---
layout: post
title:  "2022 in Consuming"
date:   2022-12-28 12:38:07 +0200
categories: jekyll update
comments: false
published: false
---
Just rambling about some books, music and podcasts I've been exposed to in 2022. I did a similar thing in
[2021](https://kevinkle.in/jekyll/update/2021/12/28/2021_consuming.html) and [2020](http://kevinkle.in/jekyll/update/2021/01/01/2020_consuming.html).

## Books

# What I Talk About When I Talk About Running - Haruki Murakami
I'm reading this constantly wondering why I'm reading it but never contemplating stopping.

# Faserland - Christian Kracht
The nonchalant absurdity sometimes reminded me of Jack Kerouac. So many things I couldn't relate to and so many questions I'd need to ask about. Christian Kracht's precision in descriptions and childish behaviors made me empathize a lot with a character who's certainly not a posterboy for likeableness.

# You Get So Lonely

# Early Retirement Extreme

# Every Love Story is a Ghost Story: A Life of David Foster Wallace - D.T. Max
For most of the book I figured the many literary details and descriptions went over my head - that I was simply not part of the target audience. The stunningly short end, where suddenly life turns immesurably somber made me rethink and make it seem as if this judgement was premature: the literary details might best explain what DFW was going through. His constant strive to be better, most importantly in walking the talk and escaping hypocrisy, are maybe best illustrated with literary jargon and details. While D.T. Max quotes stunning writing and speech from DFW, the sentence that struck me most was of his own: "I was amazed to see a stocky man [...] and that expression of a deer who wishes it was anywhere but on this road."

# On Connection - Kae Tempest
I mean this in the least offensive way: I have a feeling I would have felt more connected if the author had talked a little less about themselves and a little more on the topic. I think there are some great ideas and beautiful thoughts. I also think they could be polished further, distilled to a purer form.

## Records

# Skating in Central Park - Bill Evans

# By the Time I Get to Phoenix - Injury Reserve
This record overwhelmed me. If there is a visual analogy to ASMR it's probably their music video for 'Outside'. I was really surprised to hear that they've been doing music for a while - this really felt like a 'first album' to me. While I admire many of the songs for their artistic appeal, I have to point out that 'Outside', 'SS San Francisco' and 'Knee' connect to something inside of me in a very direct way.

# Melt My Eyez See Your Future - Denzel Curry
Talk about style pluralism! The first tracks and 'The Ills' ironically felt like a breath of fresh air for them reminding be of 90s rap with their straightforward flow and clear and simple enunciation. Some tracks feel outlandish, tropical. Others make me wonder whether 'Lounge Rap' is a common term. Others remind me of what I don't like about most Hip Hop of the past ten years - sirenes, corny violin beats, out of place cellos, ingenuine use of autotune and 'party music'. In general, Denzel Curry's energy seemed tamed, the tracks less visceral than some of his prior work.

# Skinty Fia - Fontaines DC

# Ants From Up There - Black Country, New Road


## Music: Diverse

## Podcasts

# Mad Fientist

## Blog posts

# [The Price of Discipline](https://perell.com/essay/the-price-of-discipline/)

# [103 Bits of Advice](https://kk.org/thetechnium/103-bits-of-advice-i-wish-i-had-known/)

## Papers
# [Long-term real-world effectiveness of allergyimmunotherapy in patients with allergic rhinitis andasthma: Results from the REACT study, a retrospectivecohort study](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S2666776221002611?token=7DF5AAF0C5341049C1C2894B9DBE53B0F117CE47A2581AECB729E6FEF3B4287387A8042B06A0383C198B9CDEBCC74D7F&originRegion=eu-west-1&originCreation=20220102154029)

Restrospective use of health insurance claims data. Used propensity score matching.
