---
title:  "2023 in Music"
date:   2023-12-22 12:38:07 +0200
description:  "Records I listened to this year"
comments: false
published: true
tags: [thoughts]
katex: False
---

Just rambling about some music I've been exposed to in 2023. I did a similar thing in
[2022](https://kevinkle.in/posts/2022-12-22-2022_consuming/),
[2021](https://kevinkle.in/posts/2021-12-28-2021_consuming/) and
[2020](https://kevinkle.in/posts/2021-01-02-2020_consuming/).

# Live recording

King Krule covered Connan Mockasin's 'Forever Dolphin Love' on Annie
Mac's Radio 1 show. I don't know whether there has been a single day
of the second half of 2023 on which I haven't listened to this
recording.

[Treat yourself](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zPGYiC1P1LA)

# Records

## When I Have Fears - The Murder Capital
Wow - this hit me like a train. The album I had long been waiting for without knowing about it. I don't perceive this album as
a truly 'great' album. Rather, parts of it just scratch that itch that nothing else seems to reach. 'Green and Blue' is visceral,
direct and yet avoids being harsh or blunt. I like [this live recording](https://youtu.be/jQtbKWmIUxs) quite a bit.
[This article](https://www.irishtimes.com/culture/music/2023/01/07/the-murder-capital-we-just-couldnt-talk-to-each-other-trust-was-a-huge-issue/)
from the Irish Times taught me the word 'suave' - meaning elegant, charming, confident - through a description of lead vocalist
James McGovern. I agree.

## On Giacometti - Hania Rani
It took me a moment to warm up to this. I think my main problem was that I'd been too spoiled by the sweet sweet nectar of 'Esja' - 
big footsteps to fill. I learned to put 'On Giacometti' in a different
category; it seems to be of a rather atmospheric and less stage-filling nature. I'm excited for future works of hers.

## UGLY - Slowthai
I've repeatedly caught myself thinking that I find this really original. I think Slowthai does great in channeling
energy on tracks like 'Selfish', 'Fuck it Puppet', 'Tourniquet' and 'Happy'. I'm still surprised by 'Sooner' and 'UGLY' - they kind
of feel like Babyshambles songs to me, in a good way. While I didn't love the echoing chorus, I thought the verses
of 'Never Again' were solid ballad material.
Overall I admire the creative effort and most songs in isolation - the
album as a whole doesn't necessarily feel super coherent to me.

## Selected Ambient Works 85-92 - Aphex Twin
I play this when I feel like electronic music but am in presence of
people who aren't into electronic music. I can't wrap my head around
the fact that this is music from the 80s.

## Bright Green Field - Squid
I'm glad this kind of music exists.

## Horizon Problems - Geju
I don't feel strongly about it but listened to it quite a bit while programming. I really like the
voice and pronounciation of the guy who ended up being sampled on 'Heinz'.

## Scaring the Hoes - JPEGMafia and Danny Brown
At first, Danny Brown's repetitive, nasal rapping and the 80s
influence in the beats were a bit too much for me. Anthony Fantano's
super high opinion of this made me plow through it a bit more. I
definitely learned to like it.

## v2.0 - GoGo Penguin
Fairly soothing, yet stimulating.

## James Blake - James Blake
We've grown close.

##  Love What Survives - Mount Kimbie
I almost find it a pity that the King Krule feature 'Blue Lines' is on
this album since it feels like a majestic and beautiful light tower
that unfortunately also happens to steal the show from an otherwise
very picturesque yet more dimly lit scenery. I really like this.

## LOUIE - Kenny Beats
Inoffensive; gentle and a bit bland.

## Flimsier - King Krule
My thoughts and feelings on this record are still developing a lot. I can already tell that I admire it, in some way. It does require some effort to listen to and can be a bit abrasive at times - 
I guess by design.

## Shades Of Blue: Madlib Invades Blue Note - Madlib
It came to me out of nowhere and is no doubt meant to stay.
