---
title:  "2024 in Consuming"
date:   2024-12-31 12:38:07 +0200
description:
comments: false
tags: [thoughts]
katex: False
params:
  published: false
---

Just rambling about some music I've been exposed to in 2023. I did a similar thing in
[2022](https://kevinkle.in/posts/2022-12-22-2022_consuming/),
[2021](https://kevinkle.in/posts/2021-12-28-2021_consuming/) and
[2020](https://kevinkle.in/posts/2021-01-02-2020_consuming/).

# Records

## Quaranta - Danny Brown
TODO

## Only For Dolphins - Action Bronson
TODO

## Sour Soul - BADBADNOTGOOD & Ghostface Killah
I think this is my favourite BADBADNOTGOOD album. It doesn't feel as
excessively playful, more authentic than other works of theirs to me. More necessity, less luxury.

## FABRICLIVE 59 - Four Tet
TODO

## Space Heavy - King Krule
TODO

## The Sunset Violent - Mount Kimbie
It feels as though I had been listening to 'Empty and Silent' for decades.

## The Queen is Dead - The Smiths
TODO

## Vol. 4 - Black Sabbath
This album didn't feel very 'produced'; the arrangements felt quite
improvised and suprisiing; the mix was surprisingly bimodal with very high and low
frequencies. I actually mistook the base guitar for a guitar!
I can totally picture how a 14 year old -- lying on a narrow bed,
staring at the ceiling - is massively impacted and moved by songs like
'Snowblind' and 'Under the Sun'.

## The Glow Pt. 2 - The Microphones
TODO

## Romance - Fontaines DC
TODO

## Violent Femmes - Violent Femmes
TODO

## Toxicity - System of a Down
Either this album has aged very well or I am somehow still stuck in my
teens.

## I LAY DOWN MY LIFE FOR YOU - JPEGMAFIA
While I admire JPEGMAFIA's courage and determination, I haven't gotten
to truly liking this album. I keep coming back to individual songs but that's
about it.

# Books

## Manorism - Sode, Yomi
Harmless and unremarkable.

## Art and Fear: Observations on the Perils (and Rewards) of Artmaking - David Bayles
Somehow this book felt very 'American' to me. I think I expected
something a little more insightful; I don't know why I expected that, though.

## Conversations with Friends - Sally Rooney
Reading this I felt as though I was indulging in a guilty
pleasure. Most certainly very captivating.

## The Agony and The Ecstasy - Irvine Stone
This is a large book and it demanded quite a bit of patience on my as
well as the book's end to get us through this.
I definitely learned about scuplture, art history and the church. What
struck me most, though, was how Michelangelo was portrayed as a pawn,
effortlessly moved around by the powerful. I perceived the writing as
though his dedication and superiority made him important, but stripped
him of all powers and self-determination.

## Dried-Up in meetings & other short stories - Mir Jalal
Refreshingly simple; at times beautifully absurd, at times a little
bland to read.

## Women - Charles Bukowski
I thought that the noise of promiscuity and drinking and ruthlesness made the few,
somewhat serene moments of virtue (or rather absence of vices?)
quite powerful; they struck me.

## Girl with Curious Hair - David Foster Wallace
I read some of these short stories for vibes only; some for learning
new words. Yet, other stories, such as the one on LBJ, captivated me,
made me fall for suspense (I find it hard to believe that such an
avant-garde/experimental/edgy book at times relies on good old
suspense).
This is probably the most daring, the most left-field book I've read.

## Brief Interviews with Hideous Men - David Foster Wallace
These short stories had everything. Lots of  intricate and complex
narrative structure, filled with beautifully flowing use of
language. But don't accuse DFW of intellectual masturbation too soon;
I find that he left space for the visceral and baked quite a bit of
humanly simple (simply humane?), emotive, touching themes into this
collection. Hell, there was even some **suspense**.
