---
title: "Post Title"
date: 2000-01-01 7:38:07 +0200
comments: false
published: false
description: This is a really cool post, please read it.
tags: [thoughts]
katex: False
---

> Never do anything that's not important.
- ?

> Sleep when tired.
- Nick Cammarata (not verbatim) - [Tweet](https://twitter.com/nickcammarata/status/1328335453309657088?s=20&t=_-zlXTCAvfvC467uvog7lw)


> What you do on your bad days matters more than what you do on your good days.
- Kevin Kelly, [103 bits of advice I wish I had known](https://kk.org/thetechnium/103-bits-of-advice-i-wish-i-had-known/)

> Always be closing.
- ?

> Defend those who are absent.
- Steven Covey, 7 Habbits of Highly Effective People

> Measure twice, cut once.
- Steven Covey, 7 Habbits of Highly Effective People

> Hustle while you wait
- Steven Covey, 7 Habbits of Highly Effective People
? Also Malcom X?

> And when you take risks, insults by half-men [...] are similar to barks by non-human animals: you can't feel insulted by a dog.
- Nassim Taleb - Antifragile

> Sometimes scantiness of nourishment restores the system.
- Nassim Taleb, Antifragile

> You can't expect above-average outcomes from an average approach.
- Distillation of Paul Graham's [Beating the Averages](http://www.paulgraham.com/avg.html)


> Probably every vice was once a virtue.
- Will & Ariel Durant - The Lessons of History

> Explicit is better than implicit.
- [The Zen of Python](https://peps.python.org/pep-0020/)

> Nie mehr will ich meine Augen niederschlagen, wenn eine schöne Frau mir begegnet.
- Hermann Hesse, Siddhartha

> Euphemisms are the mother tongue of manipulation.  [...] if someone doesn't use straight language, don't act straight away
- Mikael Krogerugs & Roman Tschäppeler, The Communication Book

> If communication does not work, you should ask yourself: what state am I in at the moment
- Mikael Krogerugs & Roman Tschäppeler, The Communication Book

> The truth can set you free.
- Randy Pausch, The Last Lecture

> Am meisten erreicht man, wann man den Lustgewinn aus den Quellen psyschicher und intellektueller Arbeit genügend zu erhöhen versteht.
- Sigmund Freud, Das Unbehagen in der Kultur

> You don't know whose dog died today.
??

> Will anyone sneer at me? That will be his concern; mine will be to ensure that nothing I do or say deserve the sneer.
- Marc Aurel, Meditations

> To what use am I now putting the power of my soul?
- Marc Aurel, Meditations,

> I stop writing every day at the point where I feel I can write more. Do that and the next day's work goes surprisingly smoothly.
- Haruki Murakami

> Needs and wants are different in degree, not in kind.
- Jacob Lund Fisker, Early Retirement Extreme

> Signs misguide us in any single case, but they guide is right in the majority of them.
- Polya, How to Solve It

> Don't judge decisions by their outcome.
- Digest of Nassim Taleb's Fooled by Randomness

> Impatience with actions, patience with results.
- Naval Ravikant as quoted in Eric Jorgenson's The Almanack of Naval

> When everyone is sick, we no longer consider it a disease.
- Naval Ravikant as quoted in Eric Jorgenson's The Almanack of Naval

> If you're evenly split on a difficult decision, take the path that is more difficult in the short term.
- Naval Ravikant as quoted in Eric Jorgenson's The Almanack of Naval

> Irony has only emergency use. Carried over time, it is the voice of the trapped who have come to enjoy the cage. [...] serves an almost exclusively negative function.
- David Foster Wallace as quoted in D.T. Max's Every Love Story Is a Ghost Story

> If you want to be a good intuitive Bayesian [...] you need to protect your priors. [...] that might mean turning off the news.
- Brian Christian & Tom Griffiths - ALgorithms to live by

> People tend to over-explore
- Brian Christian & Tom Griffiths - ALgorithms to live by

> As system just can't respond to short-term changes when it has long-term delays.
- Donella H. Meadows

> Don't confuse effort with result.
- Donella H. Meadows

> You must study the endgame before anything else.
- Peter Thiel and Blake masters quoting Raùl Capablanca in Zero to One

> The old is expected to stay longer than the young in proportion to their age. 
- Nassim Taleb, Antifragile, in reference to Power-law distributed phenomena

> Don't use parantheses. Either give the topic its rightful stage or remove it for it lacks importance.
- ?

> If you’re thinking without writing, you only think you’re thinking.

— Leslie Lamport

> Your obligation is that of active participation.

- Edsger Dijsktra

> When in doubt: go to bed; don't eat; don't buy.
- ?

> Most things are a marathon, not a sprint.
- ?

> Most things don't work.
- Judi Densch quoting me

